Update APM OTel page (#4100)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/apm/open-telemetry.asciidoc

With an Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Language SDK you have access to all the features of the OpenTelemetry SDK that it customizes, plus:

* You may get access to SDK improvements and bug fixes contributed by the Elastic team _before_
the changes are available upstream in the OpenTelemetry repositories.
* The distro preconfigures the collection of tracing and metrics signals, applying some opinionated defaults,
such as which sources are collected by default.

// TODO: Update links when distro docs are markdown-ified
Get started with an Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Language SDK:

* preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Java is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java[Java]
* preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry .NET is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-dotnet[.NET]

> * preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Node.js is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-node[Node.js]

Reviewer: bold and add arrow like the other "get started" links have?

[NOTE]
====
For more details about OpenTelemetry distributions in general,
visit the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions[OpenTelemetry documentation].
====

[float]
[[apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent]]
== OpenTelemetry API/SDK + Elastic APM agent

Use the OpenTelemetry API/SDKs with Elastic APM agents to translate OpenTelemetry API calls to Elastic APM API calls.

> This allows you to reuse your existing instrumentation to create Elastic APM transactions and spans--avoiding

Reviewer: I would clarify that we're referring to existing OTel instrumentation here.

```suggestion
This allows you to reuse your existing OpenTelemetry instrumentation to create Elastic APM transactions and spans--avoiding
```

vendor lock-in and having to redo manual instrumentation.

// Do we want to say anything about why you wouldn't choose this

> // method to send data to Elastic?

Reviewer: The general downside of this approach is that not all features of the OpenTelemetry API are supported. Agent docs have a full list of caveats.

This is currently supported by the Java, Python, .NET, and Node.js agents.

<<apm-open-telemetry-with-elastic,*Get started with an OpenTelemetry API/SDK + an Elastic APM agent →*>>

image::images/apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent.png[]

{nbsp} +

[float]
[[apm-otel-api-sdk]]
== OpenTelemetry API/SDK

The {stack} natively supports the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP).
This means trace data and metrics collected from your applications and infrastructure by an
OpenTelemetry agent can be sent directly to the {stack}.

// Do we want to say anything about why you would/wouldn't choose this

> // method to send data to Elastic?

Reviewer: This path is recommended for technologies which we do not provide a solution for. For example, users who want to instrument C or C++ should use raw OTel ([opentelemetry cpp](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp)). Other languages include erlang, lua, perl.

Downsides:
* we don't support raw otel agents
* no enterprise apm features
* performance efficiency

[[apm-open-telemetry]]
== Use OpenTelemetry with APM

++++
<titleabbrev>Use OpenTelemetry</titleabbrev>
++++

https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/what-is-opentelemetry/[OpenTelemetry] is a set of APIs, SDKs, tooling,
and integrations that enable the capture and management of telemetry data from your services and applications.

// Improve wording?
// TODO: Update link when landing page is ready
[NOTE]
====
To learn more about using OpenTelemetry with Elastic _outside_ the context of APM,
refer to https://github.com/elastic/opentelemetry[Use OpenTelemetry with Elastic].

> ====

Reviewer 2: Maybe you could say something about also being able to use OTel to collect infrastructure and host like logs and metrics to explain what the context might be outside of APM.

> ====

Reviewer 3: >To learn more about using OpenTelemetry with Elastic _outside_ the context of APM

For a complete overview of using OpenTelemetry with Elastic, explore [Elastic Distributions of OpenTelemetry](https://github.com/elastic/opentelemetry).

Elastic integrates with OpenTelemetry, allowing you to reuse your existing instrumentation
to easily send observability data to the {stack}.
There are several ways to integrate OpenTelemetry with the {stack}:

* <<apm-otel-elastic-distros,Elastic Distributions for OpenTelemetry>>
* <<apm-otel-api-sdk,OpenTelemetry API/SDK>>
* <<apm-otel-collector,OpenTelemetry Collector>>
* <<apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent,OpenTelemetry API/SDK + Elastic APM agent>>

> * <<apm-otel-lambda,Lambda collector exporter>>

Reviewer 3: I don't follow these options perhaps @AlexanderWert or @akhileshpok can chime in.

[float]
[[apm-otel-elastic-distros]]
== Elastic Distributions for OpenTelemetry

Elastic offers several distributions for OpenTelemetry.
A _distribution_ is a customized version of an upstream OpenTelemetry repository.
Each Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry is an extension of an https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/[OpenTelemetry Language API or SDK].

image::images/apm-otel-distro.png[]

> With an Elastic distro you have access to all the features of the OpenTelemetry API or SDK that it extends, plus:

Reviewer 2: Would you want to call out the use of "distro" for distribution? Maybe for an OTel users it's understood, so it doesn't need to be.

* You may get access to API/SDK improvements and bug fixes contributed by the Elastic team _before_
the changes are available upstream in the OpenTelemetry repositories.
* The distro preconfigures the collection of tracing and metrics signals, applying some opinionated defaults,

> such as which sources are collected by default.

Reviewer 3: As we now have an Elastic Distro for OpenTelemetry Collector is key that we differentiate these documentation to use the specific term eg. Elastic Distro for OpenTelemetry Java APM Agent. 

@akhileshpok should be able to help normalize the names as I'm aware there are some agents, SDKs etc.. 

>With an Elastic distro you have access to

We should avoid referring to only APM agents as Elastic Distros.

// TODO: Update links when distro docs are markdown-ified
Get started with an Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry:

* https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java[Java]
* https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-dotnet[.NET]
* https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-node[Node.js]
* https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-python[Python]

[NOTE]
====
For more details about OpenTelemetry distributions in general,
visit the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/distributions[OpenTelemetry documentation].
====

[float]
[[apm-otel-api-sdk]]
== OpenTelemetry API/SDK

The {stack} natively supports the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP).
This means trace data and metrics collected from your applications and infrastructure by an
OpenTelemetry agent can be sent directly to the {stack}.

// Do we want to say anything about why you would/wouldn't choose this

> // method to send data to Elastic?

Author: This page could be used as an opportunity to help users decide which method to use since they are all listed side-by-side &mdash; a perfect place to compare/contrast their options. Do we want to say anything about the situations in which a user would/wouldn't choose this method to send data to Elastic?

Reviewer 2: I was going to mention this as well. The OTel API/SDK + Elastic APM agent section gives a little more on why you might choose that. This page seems like and entry point for users and providing that info here could be valuable since they might not know which solution will work for them.

<<apm-instrument-apps-otel,*Get started with an OpenTelemetry API/SDK →*>>

image::images/apm-otel-api-sdk.png[]

{nbsp} +

[float]
[[apm-otel-collector]]
== OpenTelemetry Collector

> // Should we also mention the Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Collector?

Author: In the existing doc, this option was just about using the OpenTelemetry Collector. Should we also mention the Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Collector here?

The {stack} natively supports the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP).
This means trace data and metrics collected from your applications and infrastructure by an
OpenTelemetry Collector can be sent directly to the {stack}.

// Do we want to say anything about why you would/wouldn't choose this

> // method to send data to Elastic?

Reviewer: I think the limitations here are going to be similar to the API/SDK section:
- no support
- not all features supported yet

Could potentially pull more from the [limitations of this option](https://observability-docs_bk_4100.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/observability/master/apm-open-telemetry-known-limitations.html)?

<<apm-connect-open-telemetry-collector,*Get started with an OpenTelemetry Collector →*>>

image::images/apm-otel-collector.png[]

{nbsp} +

[float]
[[apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent]]
== OpenTelemetry API/SDK + Elastic APM agent

Use the OpenTelemetry API/SDKs with Elastic APM agents to translate OpenTelemetry API calls to Elastic APM API calls.
This allows you to reuse your existing instrumentation to create Elastic APM transactions and spans--avoiding
vendor lock-in and having to redo manual instrumentation.

// Do we want to say anything about why you wouldn't choose this

> // method to send data to Elastic?

Author: We kind of get into why you _would_ choose this method in the first paragraph. Do we want to provide any guidance on when you would _not_ want to use this method, too?

such as which sources are collected by default.

// Why you wouldn't choose this method
// Still in tech preview?

Get started with an Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Language SDK:

* preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Java is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-java[*Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Java →*]
* preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry .NET is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-dotnet[*Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry .NET →*]
* preview:["The Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Node.js is not yet recommended for production use. Functionality may be changed or removed in future releases. Alpha releases are not subject to the support SLA of official GA features."] https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-node[*Elastic Distribution for OpenTelemetry Node.js →*]

> 

Reviewer 4: We also have a distribution in `technical preview` for Python, that we should add in this list:
https://github.com/elastic/elastic-otel-python

Use the OpenTelemetry API/SDKs with Elastic APM agents to translate OpenTelemetry API calls to Elastic APM API calls.

image::images/apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent.png[]

// Why you _would_ choose this method
This allows you to reuse your existing OpenTelemetry instrumentation to create Elastic APM transactions and spans--avoiding
vendor lock-in and having to redo manual instrumentation.

// Why you would _not_ choose this method
However, not all features of the OpenTelemetry API are supported when using this approach, and
not all Elastic APM agents support this approach.

Find more details about how to use an OpenTelemetry API or SDK with an Elastic APM agent and
which OpenTelemetry API features are supported in the APM agent documentation:

* {apm-java-ref}/opentelemetry-bridge.html[*APM Java agent →*]
* {apm-dotnet-ref}/opentelemetry-bridge.html[*APM .NET agent →*]
* {apm-node-ref}/opentelemetry-bridge.html[*APM Node.js agent →*]
* {apm-py-ref}/opentelemetry-bridge.html[*APM Python agent →*]

// <<apm-open-telemetry-with-elastic,*Get started with an OpenTelemetry API/SDK + an Elastic APM agent →*>>

[float]
[[apm-otel-native-support]]

> == OpenTelemetry native support

Reviewer 4: With that title, this section somehow subsumes two of the other sections (because there we also go through the OTel native support):

- Elastic Distributions for OpenTelemetry Language SDKs
- AWS Lambda Collector exporter

The main point here that we want to make is that users can also use any upstream / custom OTel components (SDKs or collector) to send data to Elastic through OTLP.

Let's maybe change the title to something along those lines:
- `OpenTelemetry-owned Language SDKs and Collector`
- `Vanilla OpenTelemetry Language SDKs and Collector`
- `Upstream OpenTelemetry Language SDKs and Collector`
- `Vanilla OpenTelemetry Components`
- ...

The {stack} natively supports the OpenTelemetry protocol (OTLP).
This means trace data and metrics collected from your applications and infrastructure by an

> OpenTelemetry agent or OpenTelemetry Collector can be sent directly to the {stack}.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
OpenTelemetry language SDK or OpenTelemetry Collector can be sent directly to the {stack}.
```

by OpenTelemetry, including:

* Elastic can't provide implementation support on how to use upstream OpenTelemetry tools.
* You won't have access to Elastic enterprise APM features.
* You may experience problems with performance efficiency.

For more on the limitations associated with using upstream OpenTelemetry tools,
refer to <<apm-open-telemetry-known-limitations>>.

// Where to go next
<<apm-open-telemetry-direct,*Get started with upstream OpenTelemetry SDKs and Collectors →*>>

[float]
[[apm-otel-lambda]]
== AWS Lambda collector exporter

AWS Lambda functions can be instrumented with OpenTelemetry and monitored with Elastic {observability}.

// Do we want to say anything about why you would/wouldn't choose this
// method to send data to Elastic?

// Where to go next
To get started, follow the official AWS Distro for OpenTelemetry Lambda documentation, and configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to output traces and metrics to your Elastic cluster:

https://aws-otel.github.io/docs/getting-started/lambda[*Get started with the AWS Distro for OpenTelemetry Lambda*^] image:images/icons/popout.svg[]

// TODO: I'm not sure what this diagram should look like...

> // image::images/apm-otel-lambda.png[]

Author: I don't feel confident enough about this diagram to include it. I can hide it for now unless there's someone who can [take a closer look](https://github.com/colleenmcginnis/observability-docs/blob/apm-otel-note/docs/en/observability/apm/images/apm-otel-lambda.png).

Reviewer: Agreed. I don't have enough knowledge here to help. Let's not let this block though. This is something we can work with @estolfo on perfecting.

// Hide from nav
include::./otel-with-elastic.asciidoc[]

include::./otel-direct.asciidoc[]

> // Hide from nav

Author: @bmorelli25 do you have any objections to removing these two pages: [OpenTelemetry API/SDK with Elastic APM agents](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/apm-open-telemetry-with-elastic.html) and [AWS Lambda Support](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/observability/current/apm-open-telemetry-other-env.html)? They don't really add any real value on top of what's on the [Use OpenTelemetry with APM](https://observability-docs_bk_4100.docs-preview.app.elstc.co/guide/en/observability/master/apm-open-telemetry.html#apm-otel-api-sdk-elastic-agent) page (except maybe making these options more visible in the nav).

Reviewer: Oh interesting. This makes sense. Let's do it.
